# Dataset used in paper "Medicare Fraud Detection using Neural Networks"

Outlined in the **Data sets** section

- In this paper we use the Medicare Part B data set provided by CMS [27] for years 2012–
2016, namely the Medicare Provider Utilization and Payment Data: Physician and Other
Supplier PUF.
- To enable supervised learning, a second data set, the List of Excluded Individuals
and Entities (LEIE) [13], is used to label providers within the Medicare Part B
data set as fraudulent or non-fraudulent.
- In this section, we describe these data sets in
detail and discuss the pre-processing steps that we take to create the final labeled data
set. This process follows the procedures outlined by Herland et al. [26].

### References

- 13: Office of Inspector General. LEIE downloadable databases. https ://oig.hhs.gov/exclu sions /exclu sions list.asp.
Accessed 20 Jan 2019.
- 26: Herland M, Khoshgoftaar TM, Bauder RA. Big data fraud detection using multiple medicare data sources. J Big Data.
2018;5(1):29. https ://doi.org/10.1186/s4053 7-018-0138-3.
- 27: Centers For Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medicare provider utilization and payment data: physician and other
supplier. https ://www.cms.gov/resea rch-stati stics -data-and-syste ms/stati stics -trend s-and-repor ts/medic are-provi
der-charg e-data/physi cian-and-other -suppl ier.html. Accessed 20 Jan 2019.

## Medicare Part B data

> Records within
the data set contain various provider-level attributes, e.g. National Provider Identifier
(NPI), first and last name, gender, credentials, and address.

> In addition to provider-level details,
records contain claims information that describe a provider’s activity within Medicare
over a single year. Examples of claims data include the procedure performed, the average
charge amount submitted to Medicare, the average amount paid by Medicare, and the
place of service.

> The procedures rendered are encoded using the Healthcare Common
Procedures Coding System (HCPCS) [68]. For example, HCPCS codes 99219 and 88346
are used to bill for hospital observation care and antibody evaluation, respectively.

> For each annual release, CMS aggregates the data over: (1) provider NPI, (2) HCPCS
code, and (3) place of service. This produces multiple records for each provider, with one
record for each HCPCS code and place of service combination

> CMS decided to separate
claims data by place of service, i.e. facility versus non-facility, because procedure fees
will vary depending on where the service was performed

> With 28 attributes describing the claims submitted by Medicare providers, and over
9 million rows per year, this publicly available data set is an excellent candidate for data
analysis and machine learning. Unfortunately, it is not readily prepared for fraud detection.
In the next section, we introduce a second data set that is used for the purpose of
mapping fraud labels to the providers listed in the Medicare Part B data set.

## LEIE Data

> Real-world Medicare provider fraud labels are identified using the publicly available
LEIE data.

> Excluded individuals are unable to receive payment from Federal healthcare
programs for any services, and must apply for reinstatement once their exclusion period
has been satisfied.

> The current LEIE data format contains 18 attributes that describe the
provider and the reason for their exclusion

> The LEIE exclusion type attribute is a categorical value that describes the offense
and its severity

> Following the work by Bauder and Khoshgoftaar [35], a subset of exclusion rules that are most indicative of fraud is selected for labeling Medicare providers.
Table 3 lists the exclusion rules used in this paper along with their mandatory
exclusion periods.

> **We use the NPI numbers of excluded individuals that have
been convicted under one of these rules to identify fraudulent providers within the
Medicare Part B data set.**

> For these providers in the Medicare Part B data set, whose
NPI number matches those of the LEIE data set, **claims that are dated prior to the
provider’s exclusion date are labeled as fraudulent.** In doing so, we are making the
assumption that a provider’s claims activity prior to the date that they were excluded
from Medicare reflects fraudulent activity, as they were soon after convicted.

> Since this is the only mechanism by which we label Medicare providers as
fraudulent, there will be a number of fraudulent providers that are mislabeled as nonfraudulent,
i.e. **class noise**. This is taken into consideration when evaluating results.

## Fraud Labeling

> Fraudulent provider labels are generated by matching the NPI numbers of excluded
individuals from the LEIE data set to the Medicare Part B data set.

> Since Medicare PUF and LEIE data have different release schedules, Herland et al.
decided to round exclusion end dates to the nearest year.

> Taking the exclusion end
date as the minimum of the exclusion date and the waiver date, providers are labeled
as fraudulent for a given year if they are on the exclusion list for the majority of that
year.

## Data Processing

- Years 2012-2016
- Feature Matching
  - remove those features not available across
all 5 years.
- Missing Data
  - removing Part B records with missing NPI numbers and missing HCPCS codes
  - Rows containing HCPCS codes corresponding to prescription drugs were also removed, limiting
the data set to medical procedures.
- Many of the
provider-level attributes are removed from the Medicare data, e.g. name and address.
- The resulting feature set and their corresponding
data types are outlined in Table 4.
